hey are you shy well don't clam up on me
yet
what you never talked to an oyster
before first time for everything
i'm here to answer the most common
questions humans have about my kind
like how we make pearls and why we spit
can you see my back on the outside i
have a hard shell
if you look in my oyster relatives
you'll notice that we're different
that's because i get my shape from
attaching myself to a bed
a favorite pastime of many humans too eh
mine isn't your kind of bed though but a
surface filled with oysters
there are only five common types of
oysters but we actually come in 150
varieties
the ones people eat belong to a
different family than shiny pearl
oysters
lucky me right my kind aren't even
related to those folks
but i did meet the largest oyster in the
world it's called the pintada maxima
and it's as big as your dinner plate now
despite my rough outer appearance
i'm very sensitive on the inside i have
a fleshy body called the foot
it sounds like the thing you put your
shoes on but it's not the same
even though it smells like it sometimes
i also have a slimy tissue called the
mantle
that's the part of me that's sensitive
when an intruder sees my shell open and
decides to enter
i have no choice but to defend myself
now i have no hands to shoo the little
invader out
no legs to run away so i do something
else
i produce a substance called an acre it
begins to layer around the irritating
parasite trying to live in my shell with
me
over time i add more and more layers to
make sure that it doesn't
escape and that's how my pearls are
formed
my cousins in freshwater can make a
pearl in one to six years
but i live in salt water and it takes me
five to twenty years
almost as long as my life span and let
me clear something up
there's a myth going around that when
sand enters my body i produce pearls
but that's only true if the scent has
parasites attached to it
i can easily kick the sand out without
wasting my precious juice
i just don't like sea worms and bugs
now did you know that the pearls we
produce have the same coating as our
inner shell
yup same color and everything that
fascinated a lot of your scientists
and when they broke it down they found
that naked contains calcium carbonate
this comes in the form of two different
minerals so they broke it down even
further
and also found some proteins that
connect to form something called
conchiolin think of it as your school
glue that holds
everything together all these combined
give my pearls that shiny luster
but it isn't as smooth as it seems
maker is made of millions of tiny
crystals pressed together
have you ever seen a human rubbing some
pearls on their teeth
i always thought it was because they
didn't have a toothbrush
well as it turns out the pearl's
grittiness can be felt like sandpaper
when you rub it on your teeth
it's how you can tell if a pearl is real
fake ones
feel perfectly smooth speaking of teeth
in the old days people thought that a
white pearl was the best one
i've even heard you guys call your teeth
pearly whites
and it reminded me of some rare pearls
in the south sea
they're very wide in top quality but in
some other places
this is far from the truth there are all
sorts of pearls
one called the ecoya pearl has neutral
pink colors
sometimes they have creamier green or
silver undertones
other times they can be dyed or bleached
the best way to find out is to drill a
hole inside
and take a look at the shiny rock there
you can see its true colors
did you know that the word pearl comes
from the latin word pirum
that means pear you know like the fruit
you might be used to seeing pearls
perfectly round
like on a necklace but they're not
really spherical especially the natural
ones
in the 19th century almost all pearls
looked like pears
and the spherical ones were very
extraordinary
my great great granddad told me that now
i know what you've been thinking this
whole time
can i open up an oyster at the
restaurant down the street and find a
pearl inside
nope sorry the edible ones don't produce
these precious gemstones
they do make something that has the same
texture as their inner shells
but it isn't shiny there are around
seven types of oysters that produce
pearls
and each of them gives different colors
shapes and sizes to their treasures
so how are pearls produced well two ways
the natural root and the cultured one
natural pearls are very rare to find and
that makes them a lot more expensive
i've been around many years and i
haven't come across a single one
cultured pearls are grown on a farm some
people ask me if harvesting the pearls
damages us well that really depends on
the person opening the oysters
the best pearl farmers are very delicate
when removing them
they even use surgical tools like the
ones neurosurgeons have
to make sure the oyster is unharmed you
see the older we get
the better our pearls become that
process
isn't painful either we don't have a
central nervous system
so we don't feel pain the same way you
do
the reason farmers are careful when
opening our shells is that they try not
to damage our organs
you know i do have a heart three kidneys
and colorless blood right
so they need to protect me
[Music]
but don't worry i can see everything
around me
i have eyes all over my body that helps
me escape from predators
once i see a hungry creature coming near
me i shut my
shell tightly until they go away when
things get quiet
i like coming out to eat plankton or
algae
i got all that knowledge from my
ancestors i evolved roughly 250 million
years ago
so that means my species is 248 million
years older than yours
not that it's a competition you know
what else i'm good at
filtering water you can put me in a tank
filled with polluted water and i can
make it clean again
in fact i'm so fast that i can filter
over a gallon of water in an hour
now don't try to use me as your kitchen
water cleaner i don't work that way
when scientists found out about my mad
cleaning skills
they installed artificial oyster reefs
that reduce water contamination
as because a few of my larger friends in
the ocean were struggling in polluted
waters
sometimes you might even see me spit
that's not because i don't like you it's
just that after all that cleaning i've
been doing
i need to get rid of the water it's kind
of like what you do with seeds when you
eat watermelon
hey you ever wonder where the expression
the world is my oyster comes from
well you have william shakespeare to
thank for it remember learning about
bill
in english class it means that the world
is yours to open as you wish
that you have endless opportunities to
discover
did you know that people in china were
the first to raise oysters and ponds
and use their shells for medicine my
ancestors were also famous among the
greeks
aristotle the great philosopher spoke of
how he used our shells as ballot paper
my ancestors got so famous around europe
that the romans used to travel by boat
all the way from italy to england to buy
oysters in exchange for gold but the
most useful purpose we had centuries ago
was being natural sea walls when there
was a storm
and the waves tried to swoop onto the
land oyster reefs protected shorelines
the underwater oyster beds absorb the
energy from waves before they hit the
shore
i must admit my ancestors were epic
okay thanks for the chat and i hope you
like my
pearls of wisdom
hey